---
reference_id: PMID:30254121
title: The Cost of Metabolic Interactions in Symbioses between Insects and Bacteria with Reduced Genomes.
authors:
- Ankrah NYD
- Chouaia B
- Douglas AE
journal: mBio
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1128/mBio.01433-18
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bacteria/genetics, metabolism"
- "Bacteroidetes/genetics, metabolism"
- "Enterobacteriaceae/genetics, metabolism"
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Genome Size
- "Genome, Bacterial"
- "Genome, Insect"
- "Hemiptera/genetics, microbiology"
- "Insecta/genetics, microbiology"
- Metabolic Flux Analysis
- Metabolism
- Phylogeny
- Symbiosis
- Xylem
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Cost of Metabolic Interactions in Symbioses between Insects and Bacteria with Reduced Genomes.
**Authors:** Ankrah NYD, Chouaia B, Douglas AE
**Journal:** mBio (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mBio.01433-18](https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.01433-18)

## Content

1. mBio. 2018 Sep 25;9(5):e01433-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01433-18.

The Cost of Metabolic Interactions in Symbioses between Insects and Bacteria 
with Reduced Genomes.

Ankrah NYD(1), Chouaia B(1), Douglas AE(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 
USA.
(2)Department of Entomology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 
USA aes326@cornell.edu.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, USA.

Various intracellular bacterial symbionts that provide their host with essential 
nutrients have much-reduced genomes, attributed largely to genomic decay and 
relaxed selection. To obtain quantitative estimates of the metabolic function of 
these bacteria, we reconstructed genome- and transcriptome-informed metabolic 
models of three xylem-feeding insects that bear two bacterial symbionts with 
complementary metabolic functions: a primary symbiont, Sulcia, that has 
codiversified with the insects, and a coprimary symbiont of distinct taxonomic 
origin and with different degrees of genome reduction in each insect species 
(Hodgkinia in a cicada, Baumannia in a sharpshooter, and Sodalis in a 
spittlebug). Our simulations reveal extensive bidirectional flux of multiple 
metabolites between each symbiont and the host, but near-complete metabolic 
segregation (i.e., near absence of metabolic cross-feeding) between the two 
symbionts, a likely mode of host control over symbiont metabolism. Genome 
reduction of the symbionts is associated with an increased number of host 
metabolic inputs to the symbiont and also reduced metabolic cost to the host. In 
particular, Sulcia and Hodgkinia with genomes of ≤0.3 Mb are calculated to 
recycle ∼30 to 80% of host-derived nitrogen to essential amino acids returned to 
the host, while Baumannia and Sodalis with genomes of ≥0.6 Mb recycle 10 to 15% 
of host nitrogen. We hypothesize that genome reduction of symbionts may be 
driven by selection for increased host control and reduced host costs, as well 
as by the stochastic process of genomic decay and relaxed selection.IMPORTANCE 
Current understanding of many animal-microbial symbioses involving unculturable 
bacterial symbionts with much-reduced genomes derives almost entirely from 
nonquantitative inferences from genome data. To overcome this limitation, we 
reconstructed multipartner metabolic models that quantify both the metabolic 
fluxes within and between three xylem-feeding insects and their bacterial 
symbionts. This revealed near-complete metabolic segregation between cooccurring 
bacterial symbionts, despite extensive metabolite exchange between each symbiont 
and the host, suggestive of strict host controls over the metabolism of its 
symbionts. We extended the model analysis to investigate metabolic costs. The 
positive relationship between symbiont genome size and the metabolic cost 
incurred by the host points to fitness benefits to the host of bearing symbionts 
with small genomes. The multicompartment metabolic models developed here can be 
applied to other symbioses that are not readily tractable to experimental 
approaches.

Copyright © 2018 Ankrah et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01433-18
PMCID: PMC6156193
PMID: 30254121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]