---
reference_id: PMID:40920748
title: Breaking the reproducibility barrier with standardized protocols for plant-microbiome research.
authors:
- Novak V
- Andeer PF
- King E
- Calabria J
- Fitzpatrick C
- Kelm JM
- Wippel K
- Kosina SM
- Bowen BP
- Daum C
- Zane M
- Yadav A
- Chen M
- Russ D
- Adams CA
- Owens TK
- Lee B
- Ding Y
- Sordo Z
- Chakraborty R
- Roux S
- Deutschbauer AM
- Ushizima D
- Zengler K
- Arsova B
- Dangl JL
- Schulze-Lefert P
- Watt M
- Vogel JP
- Northen TR
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003358
keywords:
- Plants/microbiology
- Microbiota
- Reproducibility of Results
- Poaceae/microbiology
- Laboratories/standards
- Burkholderiaceae
- Rhizosphere
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Breaking the reproducibility barrier with standardized protocols for plant-microbiome research.
**Authors:** Novak V, Andeer PF, King E, Calabria J, Fitzpatrick C, Kelm JM, Wippel K, Kosina SM, Bowen BP, Daum C, Zane M, Yadav A, Chen M, Russ D, Adams CA, Owens TK, Lee B, Ding Y, Sordo Z, Chakraborty R, Roux S, Deutschbauer AM, Ushizima D, Zengler K, Arsova B, Dangl JL, Schulze-Lefert P, Watt M, Vogel JP, Northen TR
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.3003358](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3003358)

## Content

1. PLoS Biol. 2025 Sep 8;23(9):e3003358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003358. 
eCollection 2025 Sep.

Breaking the reproducibility barrier with standardized protocols for 
plant-microbiome research.

Novak V(1), Andeer PF(1), King E(2)(3), Calabria J(4), Fitzpatrick C(5), Kelm 
JM(6), Wippel K(7)(8), Kosina SM(1), Bowen BP(1)(2), Daum C(2), Zane M(2), Yadav 
A(9), Chen M(9), Russ D(5), Adams CA(1)(10), Owens TK(1), Lee B(2)(10), Ding 
Y(1), Sordo Z(11), Chakraborty R(9), Roux S(2), Deutschbauer AM(1)(10), Ushizima 
D(11), Zengler K(12)(13)(14)(15), Arsova B(6), Dangl JL(5), Schulze-Lefert P(7), 
Watt M(4), Vogel JP(2), Northen TR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(2)The DOE Joint Genome Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(3)Centro de Biotecnología y Genómica de Plantas, Universidad Politécnica de 
Madrid (UPM)-Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y 
Alimentación (INIA/CSIC), Campus de Montegancedo, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Faculty of Science, School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Australia.
(5)Department of Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of 
America.
(6)Institute for Bio- and Geosciences, Plant Sciences (IBG-2), Forschungszentrum 
Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.
(7)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany.
(8)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Earth and Environmental Sciences, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(10)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of 
California-Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(11)Computing Sciences Area, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
California, United States of America.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, United States of America.
(13)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, United States of America.
(14)Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California, United States of America.
(15)Program in Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Inter-laboratory replicability is crucial yet challenging in microbiome 
research. Leveraging microbiomes to promote soil health and plant growth 
requires understanding underlying molecular mechanisms using reproducible 
experimental systems. In a global collaborative effort involving five 
laboratories, we aimed to help advance reproducibility in microbiome studies by 
testing our ability to replicate synthetic community assembly experiments. Our 
study compared fabricated ecosystems constructed using two different synthetic 
bacterial communities, the model grass Brachypodium distachyon, and sterile 
EcoFAB 2.0 devices. All participating laboratories observed consistent 
inoculum-dependent changes in plant phenotype, root exudate composition, and 
final bacterial community structure, where Paraburkholderia sp. OAS925 could 
dramatically shift microbiome composition. Comparative genomics and exudate 
utilization linked the pH-dependent colonization ability of Paraburkholderia, 
which was further confirmed with motility assays. The study provides detailed 
protocols, benchmarking datasets, and best practices to help advance replicable 
science and inform future multi-laboratory reproducibility studies.

Copyright: © 2025 Novak et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003358
PMCID: PMC12416739
PMID: 40920748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: P.F.A. and T.R.N. are 
inventors of patent US11510376B2, held by the University of California, covering 
an Ecosystem device for determining plant-microbe interactions. All other 
authors have declared that no competing interests exist.